----------
title: Git-Based Software Development Life-Cycle
----------


# Introduction

Recently, a colleague expressed concern about losing his Jira
history upon completing a project, along with all the crucial
(functional-safety related) documentation accumulated within it. While
exporting each issue to a PDF with attachments may meet compliance
requirements, it presents a nightmarish user experience and won't
easily adapt to future customer needs.

During the same period, I stumbled upon
[`git-appraise`](https://github.com/google/git-appraise), sparking a
compelling question: Can we replace web-based tools with solutions
that store their information, history, and artifacts directly in the
repository? This shift would necessitate replacing several critical
tools for our use cases:

* *Jira*: For issue tracking and general project management
* *Confluence*: As our wiki and documentation platform
* *Bamboo*: As our CI/CD server
* *Artifactory*: For storing (Docker) images and other CI/CD artifacts
* *Gerrit*: For code reviews

It's important to *emphasize* that the replacement itself isn't the
core focus here – I recognize the challenge of persuading our
customers to embrace command-line interfaces over familiar web
UIs. The *primary objective* lies in centralizing all relevant data
alongside the code.


# Jira

## Use Cases

I figure Jira is at its core an issue tracker with a set of boards (kanban,
backlog, ...). The issue can have various status flows attached to them.

Here's an incomplete list of responsabilities/use-cases propped upon Jira by
ingenious PMO that need to be addressed.

* (Kanban) Board / Backlog
* Release Planning
* Earned Value / Spent Effort tracking and planning
* Release Notes
* Requirements/Bugs discussions
    * Attachments. It seems to be a relevant use-case to store attachments with issues.

⚠ Question for the readers: what other use-cases have been implemented with it?


## Issue/Bug Tracking

For the basic use-case of tracking *Issues* and *Bugs* is covered by either of
the following tools. Their respective advantages and downsides are addressed.

### git issue

There's [git-issue](https://github.com/dspinellis/git-issue) with an introductory
video at [FOSDEM'20](https://archive.fosdem.org/2020/schedule/event/git_issue_management/).
It allows to do issue tracking in a git repository.

As a UI it supports syncing to *Gitlab* and *GitHub*. There their web interface
can be used instead.

### git bug

The tool [git-bug](https://github.com/MichaelMure/git-bug) seems to support the
same basic features. The biggest drawback seem to be the lack of attachments
to issues. On the plus side there are multiple UI front ends, e.g., terminal,
web, &c.

There's even a [board](https://github.com/MichaelMure/git-bug/pull/843) under
development.

## Release Planning

In Jira one can define the release for which the issue will be fixed. Then all
issues that are part of the release show up in the release page of that specific
release. With this mechanism one can check if all issues that are planned for a
release are done.

### Release Notes

Storing release information in the respective issues sounds compelling. It's
not a dedicated tool for the task. The release notes need to be stiched together
manually.

As an example, have a look at [scriv](https://github.com/nedbat/scriv).


## Earned Value / Effort Spent

This is supported by `git-issue`. However it's not supported by `git-bug`.

If the information needs to be duplicated in your time-tracking software, I
suggest you track the information there or your project design Excel file.
There's also *Projects* for the more serious project managers.


## Boards

Boards are used to organise issues, bugs, and workflows. Boards only make sense
if there's a proper UI. Hence the only the state needs to be synced.

Support for boards is currently under development in `git-bug`. Whether this
information can be synced is rather unclear. However upon completion of a
(sub-)project this information is rather moot.

## Requirements

Missing from the above list is a suitable tool to track requirements. I've
heard people do this in Jira. This brings us back to the above problem and
probably shouldn't be done anyways. Including requirements we should have a
complete UNIX philosophy inspired ALM "tool".

See the following free and open options:

* [sphinx-needs](https://sphinx-needs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
* [rmtoo](http://rmtoo.florath.net/)
* [doorstop](https://doorstop.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
* there are others; give it a go in your favourite search engine.

# Confluence

It's about the only collaborative WYSIWYG wiki out there. The only alternative
out there is probably Sharepoint. VCS tracked markdown wikis are plentiful,
e.g., GitHub uses that for their Wikis.

Locally editing and live-preview is probably a solved problem, e.g., [Gollum]
(https://github.com/gollum/gollum). Merely editing markdown see, e.g.,
(https://typora.io/).

⚠ Linking to issues from the wiki has been used successfully. This can be
emulated by creating links to the git-bug ID. This is however not very
transferrable to any web UI.


# Bamboo

Alternatives to centrally hosted CI/CD tooling should be available at every
turn. Jenkins certainly provides everything, the hosting requires some effort
though to keep up-to-date.

We assume our builds and tests are going to be reproducible. Then we should be
able to run the tests, builds, &c. locally without a centralized
infrastructure.

[Act](https://github.com/nektos/act) allows us to run our CI/CD pipeline
locally. The syntax promises to be *GitHub Actions* compatible.

# Artifactory

It is questionable whether this tool can be replaced. We need some form of
repository for the OS abstraction. Be that docker, podman, or some other images.
These images can't be reasonably stored in a git repository.

If there are no Docker artifacts being generated, the artifacts can be pushed
to the repository using git-lfs. A method to avoid build-loops must be devised
if a CI is used.


# Gerrit

With [`git-appraise`](https://github.com/google/git-appraise) we can do code reviews
in the console. The results are also stored under revision control.

There's even a read-only [UI](https://github.com/google/git-appraise-web).


# Conclusion

It should be possible to do the full workflow on the console.

However, we can leverage the existing web UI for convenience. We need to be
aware of the synchronization tools' limitations. It probably pays dividends to
have plan for *all* documentation from the beginning. Putting everything into
Jira doesn't sound a like good plan.

There might even be some financial gains to be had by only paying for
tools while actually using them.

## Missing Key Features

* Putting attachements on issues in Jira will not transfer at the moment.
* Confluence probably doesn't export gracefully either.
